[TT-16831] docs: add OpenTelemetry metrics pages and restructure metrics section (#1808)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: api-management/observability.mdx

---
title: "OpenTelemetry in Tyk Gateway: Tracing, Metrics, and Logs"
description: "Tyk's native OpenTelemetry support for distributed tracing, metrics export, and log collection. The recommended observability approach for Tyk Gateway."
keywords: "OpenTelemetry, OTel, OTLP, Distributed Tracing, Metrics, Observability, Tyk Gateway, Prometheus, Datadog, Jaeger"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) is an open-source observability framework providing a vendor-neutral standard for collecting traces, metrics, and logs. Since Tyk Gateway v5.2, it is the recommended observability approach for Tyk Gateway.

Tyk supports all three signals. Traces and metrics are exported natively via the [OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) to any compatible backend. Logs are written as structured JSON to stdout and collected by an external agent. No additional components are required alongside Tyk to get started.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: This diagram is not rendering properly in the staging view. It would be 100x better to get an image from Jen.

Reviewer 2: I have asked Jen for diagrams for all the 5 mermaids

flowchart LR
    GW["Tyk Gateway"]
    GW -->|"Traces (OTLP)"| TC["Tracing backend\nDatadog · Jaeger · Dynatrace"]
    GW -->|"Metrics (OTLP)"| MC["Metrics backend\nPrometheus · Grafana · Datadog"]
    GW -->|"Logs (stdout)"| OC["OTel Collector"]
    OC --> LC["Log backend\nElasticsearch · Loki"]
```

> ## Distributed Tracing

Reviewer: Inconsistent terminology? In the introduction we just say "tracing" but here we add the qualifier "distributed". Perhaps this title should be "Tracing" and then we can keep the qualifier in the body text.

Distributed tracing gives you an end-to-end view of individual API requests as they flow through Tyk Gateway and into your upstream services. Traces help you pinpoint latency bottlenecks, trace error propagation across services, and understand the full request lifecycle.

> Tyk generates parent and child spans for each proxied request. For each API, you can optionally enable **detailed tracing** to produce a span per middleware, giving granular visibility into authentication, rate limiting, transformation, and routing steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tyk generates parent and child [spans](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) for each proxied request. For each API, you can optionally enable **detailed tracing** to produce a span per middleware, giving granular visibility into authentication, rate limiting, transformation, and routing steps.
```

**Supported propagation formats:** W3C TraceContext (default), B3, and custom or composite header modes for proprietary correlation headers.

**Supported backends:** Datadog, Dynatrace, Jaeger, New Relic, Elastic, and any OTLP-compatible endpoint.

> For configuration details and vendor-specific integration guides, see [Distributed Tracing with Tyk](/api-management/traces).

Reviewer: Why do we say "with Tyk"? I know that's the title of the linked page... so I'm also querying why we have this in the page title. Is it for SEO/AEO? It seems unnecessary.

Reviewer 2: It is unnecessary; remove it.

## Metrics

> Tyk Gateway natively pushes metrics to any OTLP-compatible backend via a configurable push interval. No sidecar or agent is required alongside the gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tyk Gateway natively pushes metrics to any OTLP-compatible backend with a configurable push interval. No sidecar or agent is required alongside the Gateway.
```

> When enabled, the gateway automatically exports three groups of metrics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When enabled, the Gateway automatically exports three groups of metrics:
```

When referring specifically to a Tyk component, it should be capitalised. When talking in general about "gateways" it should not.

> - **Request metrics:** Rate, Errors, and Duration (RED) with a three-way latency split: total, gateway-only, and upstream-only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Request metrics:** Rate, Errors, and Duration (RED) with a three-way latency split: total, Gateway-only, and upstream-only
```

For a step-by-step guide, see [Collecting Gateway Logs with OTel on Kubernetes](/api-management/collecting-gateway-logs-otel-kubernetes).

<Note>
If you don't need a full OTel pipeline, [Tyk Pump](/api-management/tyk-pump) provides built-in API traffic analytics out of the box, with no external collector required.
</Note>

## Resource Attributes

All OTel signals produced by Tyk Gateway include resource attributes: metadata set once at startup that identifies the source instance. Use these to filter and correlate signals across nodes, edge groups, and environments.

| Attribute | Always Present | Description |
|:----------|:--------------|:------------|

> | `tyk.gw.id` / `service.instance.id` | Yes | Unique node ID for this gateway instance. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.id` / `service.instance.id` | Yes | Unique ID for this Gateway instance. |
```

> | `tyk.gw.dataplane` | Yes | Whether the gateway is running as an edge (dataplane) node. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.dataplane` | Yes | Whether the Gateway is running in a distributed Data Plane. |
```

> | `tyk.gw.group.id` | No | Edge group ID. Populated only for hybrid/dataplane gateways. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.group.id` | No | Data Plane group ID. Populated only for Gateways in distributed Data Planes. |
```

> | `tyk.gw.tags` | No | Segment tags. Populated only when the gateway is segmented. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.tags` | No | Segment tags. Populated only when the Gateway is segmented. |
```

Standard OTel attributes (`service.name`, `service.version`, `host.name`, `host.arch`, `host.ip`, `process.pid`) are also included automatically.

<Note>
All OpenTelemetry configuration options are documented in the [Tyk Gateway configuration reference](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry).
</Note>

## Signal Correlation

Tyk's three signal types (traces, metrics, and logs) are produced independently, but three mechanisms let you correlate them in your observability backend.

### Trace and Span IDs in Logs

When OpenTelemetry tracing is enabled, Tyk Gateway injects trace context into both log types:

> **Access logs** include `trace_id`, the W3C trace ID for the request, matching the root span exported to your tracing backend. Enable access logs to get it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**Access logs**](/api-management/logs#access-logs) include `trace_id`, the W3C trace ID for the request, matching the root span exported to your tracing backend.
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't know why we would include this here, rather than direct to the description of Access Logs (which I've added above).

> TYK_GW_ACCESSLOGS_ENABLED=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```
... status=200 trace_id=4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736 upstream_latency=61 ...
```

> **Application logs** include both `trace_id` and `span_id` on all request-scoped entries (middleware execution, errors, debug output):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**Application logs**](/api-management/logs#application-logs) include both `trace_id` and `span_id` on all request-scoped entries (middleware execution, errors, debug output):
```

```
... level=error msg="Rate limit exceeded" prefix=rate-limit api_id=b1a41c9a89984ffd7bb7d4e3c6844ded trace_id=4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736 span_id=00f067aa0ba902b7
```

The `span_id` identifies the exact span active when the log was emitted, so you can navigate from an error log directly to the span in a trace waterfall.

For the full log field reference, see [Logging in Tyk](/api-management/logs).

<Note>
Trace and span IDs are only present in log entries associated with a sampled request. Non-request-scoped entries (startup, configuration reload, health-checks) and unsampled requests do not carry these fields.
</Note>

### Exemplars in Histogram Metrics

> When both OpenTelemetry tracing and metrics are enabled, Tyk Gateway automatically attaches exemplars to histogram metric observations. An exemplar embeds the `trace_id` and `span_id` of the active request directly inside a histogram bucket, creating a direct link from an aggregated metric to a specific trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When both OpenTelemetry tracing and metrics are enabled, Tyk Gateway automatically attaches exemplars whenever a histogram is recorded during an active sampled request.

An exemplar embeds the `trace_id` and `span_id` of the active request directly inside a histogram bucket, creating a direct link from an aggregated metric to a specific trace.
```

> No gateway configuration is required. Tyk Gateway attaches exemplars automatically whenever a histogram is recorded during an active sampled request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This simply duplicates the previous paragraph, which clearly states that this is automatic.

**What this enables:** When you see a latency spike on a `http.server.request.duration` histogram in Grafana, click the exemplar marker on the chart to navigate directly to the offending trace in Jaeger or Tempo, with no manual trace ID search required.

For full setup details, see [Exemplars](/api-management/metrics/default-metrics#exemplars) in the default metrics reference.

### Resource Attributes Across All Signals

> Traces and metrics both carry the same [resource attributes](#resource-attributes) set at gateway startup. The key correlating attribute is `tyk.gw.id` (also exported as `service.instance.id`), which uniquely identifies the gateway node that produced each signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traces and metrics both carry the same [resource attributes](#resource-attributes) set at Gateway startup. The key correlating attribute is `tyk.gw.id` (also exported as `service.instance.id`), which uniquely identifies the Gateway that produced each signal.
```

> When running multiple gateway replicas, this lets you filter metrics to a specific node using `tyk.gw.id` and find that same node's traces using the same attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running multiple Gateway replicas, this lets you filter metrics to a specific instance using `tyk.gw.id` and find that same Gateway's traces using the same attribute.
```

---
title: "OpenTelemetry in Tyk Gateway: Tracing, Metrics, and Logs"
description: "Tyk's native OpenTelemetry support for distributed tracing, metrics export, and log collection. The recommended observability approach for Tyk Gateway."
keywords: "OpenTelemetry, OTel, OTLP, Distributed Tracing, Metrics, Observability, Tyk Gateway, Prometheus, Datadog, Jaeger"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) is an open-source observability framework providing a vendor-neutral standard for collecting traces, metrics, and logs. Since Tyk Gateway v5.2, it is the recommended observability approach for Tyk Gateway.

> Tyk supports all three signals. Traces and metrics are exported natively via the [OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) to any compatible backend. Logs are written as structured JSON to stdout and collected by an external agent. No additional components are required alongside Tyk to get started.

Reviewer: We actually output logs to stderr, not stdout. This probably doesn't upset anyone as it's always been this way and while there are Jira tickets, nobody has ever been shouting about this. For accuracy, we probably ought to make it clear and only mention stderr until we actually add stdout support.

**Supported backends:** Datadog, Dynatrace, Jaeger, New Relic, Elastic, and any OTLP-compatible endpoint.

For configuration details and vendor-specific integration guides, see [Distributed Tracing with Tyk](/api-management/traces).

## Metrics

Tyk Gateway natively pushes metrics to any OTLP-compatible backend with a configurable push interval. No sidecar or agent is required alongside the Gateway.

When enabled, the Gateway automatically exports three groups of metrics:

- **Request metrics:** Rate, Errors, and Duration (RED) with a three-way latency split: total, Gateway-only, and upstream-only
- **Go runtime metrics:** Memory usage, goroutine count, and GC health
- **Configuration state metrics:** Number of APIs and policies loaded, config reload counts and durations

You can extend these with [custom counters and histograms](/api-management/metrics/custom-metrics) that use request context, JWT claims, session data, response headers, or static API metadata as dimensions.

**Compatible backends:** Prometheus, Grafana Mimir, Datadog, New Relic, Dynatrace, Elastic, and any OTel Collector.

For full configuration details, see:

> - [OpenTelemetry Metrics Configuration](/api-management/metrics/opentelemetry-configuration): enabling metrics, export config, and cardinality control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [OpenTelemetry Metrics Configuration](/api-management/logs-metrics): enabling metrics, export config, and cardinality control
```

Broken link, should it be to here?

For a step-by-step guide, see [Collecting Gateway Logs with OTel on Kubernetes](/api-management/collecting-gateway-logs-otel-kubernetes).

<Note>
If you don't need a full OTel pipeline, [Tyk Pump](/api-management/tyk-pump) provides built-in API traffic analytics out of the box, with no external collector required.
</Note>

## Resource Attributes

All OTel signals produced by Tyk Gateway include resource attributes: metadata set once at startup that identifies the source instance. Use these to filter and correlate signals across nodes, edge groups, and environments.

| Attribute | Always Present | Description |
|:----------|:--------------|:------------|
| `tyk.gw.id` / `service.instance.id` | Yes | Unique ID for this Gateway instance. |
| `tyk.gw.dataplane` | Yes | Whether the Gateway is running in a distributed Data Plane. |
| `tyk.gw.group.id` | No | Data Plane group ID. Populated only for Gateways in distributed Data Planes. |

> | `tyk.gw.tags` | No | Segment tags. Populated only when the Gateway is segmented. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.tags` | No | Segment tags. Populated only when the Gateway is [segmented](api-management/multiple-environments#what-is-api-sharding-). |
```
